.Dd March 13, 2022
.Dt CASE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm case
.Nd compare a value against a series of regular expressions, and execute into a program depending on the first expression the value
matches
.Sh SYNOPSIS
In an
.Xr execlineb 1
script:
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl S | s
.Op Fl E | e
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl n | N
.Ar value
{
.Bd -ragged -compact
.Oo
.Ar regex
{
.Ar prog...
}
.Oc
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -compact
.Oo
.Ar regex
{
.Ar prog...
}
.Oc
.Ed
.Ar ...
.Bd -ragged -compact
}
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -compact
.Ar progdefault...
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads an argument
.Ar value
and a sequence of directives in an
.Xr execline-block 7 .
.Pp
Each directive is a regular expression followed by a block.
.Pp
.Nm
matches
.Ar value
against the regular expressions in the order they are given.
.Pp
As soon as
.Ar value
matches a
.Ar regex ,
.Nm case
executes into the
.Ar prog...
command line that immediately follows the matched regex.
.Pp
If
.Ar value
matches no
.Ar regex ,
.Nm
eventually execs into
.Ar progdefault... ,
or exits 0 if
.Ar progdefault...
is empty.
.Pp
.Ar value
must match
.Ar regex
as a full word.
If only a substring of
.Ar value
matches
.Ar regex ,
it is not considered a match.
.Pp
If
.Ar value
matches no
.Ar regex ,
.Ar progdefault...
is always executed with an unmodified environment, whether
subexpression matching has been requested or not.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width e
.It Fl s
Shell matching.
The
.Ar regex
words will not be interpreted as regular expressions, but as shell
expressions to be interpreted via
.Xr fnmatch 3 .
The other options also change meanings, see the
.Sx Shell matching
section below.
.It Fl S
Regular expression matching.
This is the default.
This section, and all of the sections below except the
.Sx Shell matching
one, assumes that it is the case.
.It Fl e
Interpret the
.Ar regex
words as basic regular expressions[1].
.It Fl E
Interpret the
.Ar regex
words as extended regular expressions[2].
This is the default.
.It Fl i
Perform case-insensitive matches.
.It Fl N
Make the matching expression and subexpressions available to
.Ar prog Ap s
environment.
See the
.Sx Subexpression matching
section below.
.It Fl n
Do not transmit the matching expression and
subexpressions to
.Ar prog...
via the environment.
This is the default.
.El
.Ss Subexpression matching
If the
.Fl N
option has been given, and
.Ar value
matches a
.Ar regex ,
then
.Nm
will run
.Ar prog
with a modified environment:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
The
.Ev 0
variable will contain the
.Ar regex
that
.Ar value
matched.
.It
The
.Ev #
variable will contain the number of subexpressions in
.Ar regex .
.It
For every integer
.Va i
between 1 and the number of subexpressions (included), the variable
.Va i
contains the part of
.Ar value
that matched the
.Va i Ns th
in
.Ar regex .
.El
.Pp
To retrieve that information into your command line in an execline
script, you can use the
.Xr elgetpositionals 1
program.
.Ss Shell matching
If the
.Fl s
option has been given to
.Nm ,
then the
.Ar regex
words are not interpreted as regular expressions, but as shell
patterns, as is performed by the shell's case conditional
construct[3].
This has the following consequences:
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
Subexpression matching is always disabled.
.It
.Ar prog...
is always executed with an unmodified environment.
.It
The options to the
.Nm
command change meanings: instead of controlling how the
.Ar regex
regular expressions are interpreted by the
.Xr regcomp 3
+primitive, they now control how
.Ar value
is matched against the
.Ar regex
patterns (which are not regular expressions!) via the
.Xr fnmatch 3
+primitive.
Namely:
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl e
Treat a backslash as an ordinary character; do not allow character
escaping in patterns.
.Po
This sets the
.Dv FNM_NOESCAPE
flag.
.Pc
.It Fl E
Allow backslash escaping in patterns.
This is the default.
.Po
This clears the
.Dv FNM_NOESCAPE
flag.
.Pc
.It Fl i
Treat a period
.Po
.Ql .
.Pc
as a special character for matching
.Po
set
.Dv FNM_PERIOD
.Pc .
By default, the period is not a special character
.Po
.Dv FNM_PERIOD
is cleared
.Pc .
.It Fl N
Treat patterns as pathnames: make slashes character special.
.Po
This sets the
.Dv FNM_PATHNAME
flag.
.Pc
.It Fl n
Do not treat patterns as pathnames
.Po
clear the
.Dv FNM_PATHNAME
flag
.Pc .
This is the default.
.El
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Consider the following script; say it's named
.Ql match .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/bin/execlineb -S1
emptyenv
case -N -- $1
{
  "([fo]+)bar(baz)" { /usr/bin/env }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Running
.Ql match foooobarbaz
will print the following lines, corresponding to the output of the
.Pa /usr/bin/env
command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#=2
0=([fo]+)bar(baz)
1=foooo
2=baz
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr elgetpositionals 1 ,
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap09.html#tag_09_03
.Pp
[2]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap09.html#tag_09_04
.Pp
[3]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/V3_chap02.html#tag_18_09_04_05
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/case.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
