.Dd April 3, 2023
.Dt ELGETOPT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm elgetopt
.Nd perform
.Xr getopt 1 Ns
-style parsing on the arguments to an execline script
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl D Ar default
.Ar optstring
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
expects to find a valid number
.Ar n
of arguments in the
.Ev \&#
environment variable, and
.Ar n Ns
+1 environment variables
.Ev 0 ,
.Ev 1 ,
\&...,
.Ar n .
It exits 100 if it is not the case.
.Pp
.Nm
pushes environment variables
.Po
cf.
.Xr execline-pushenv 7
.Pc
starting with
.Ev ELGETOPT_ .
To get the previous values back, use
.Ql emptyenv -o .
.Pp
.Nm
looks into
.Ev 1 ,
.Ev 2 ,
\&... for options, as specified by
.Ar optstring ,
which is a standard
.Xr getopt 1
string.
.Pp
If the
.Fl c
switch is recognized,
.Nm
sets the
.Ev ELGETOPT_ Ns Ar c
environment variable.
The value of that variable is the argument to the
.Fl c
switch if it has one, and
.Ql 1
.Po
or
.Ar default
if given
.Pc
otherwise.
.Pp
After setting all recognized options,
.Nm
makes new
.Ev \&# ,
.Ev 1 ,
.Ev 2 ,
\&...
.Dq positional parameters
with what remains.
.Pp
.Nm
then execs into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
GNU-style options are not supported.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl D Ar default
Use
.Ar default
as the value for the
.Ev ELGETOPT_ Ns Ar c
environment variable if there is no argument to the
.Fl c
switch.
Default is
.Ql 1 .
The value is the same for all the options defined by
.Nm .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dollarat 1 ,
.Xr getopt 1 ,
.Xr shift 1 ,
.Xr execline-pushenv 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/elgetopt.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
