.Dd September 29, 2021
.Dt ENVFILE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm envfile
.Nd read a file containing variable assignments, add the variables to the environment, then execute a program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl i | Fl I
.Ar file
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads
.Ar file
and adds the key-value pairs defined in
.Ar file
to the environment.
Then it execs into
.Ar prog... ,
i.e. the rest of its command line, with the modified environment.
.Ss File syntax
.Ar file
is a text file containing lines of the form
.Ql key = value .
Whitespace is permitted before and after
.Ar key ,
and before or after
.Ar value .
.Pp
Empty lines, or lines containing only whitespace, are ignored.
Lines beginning with
.Ql #
(possibly after some whitespace) are ignored (and typically used for
comments).
Leading and trailing whitespace is stripped from values; but a value
can be double-quoted, which allows for inclusion of leading and
trailing whitespace.
.Pp
A non-commented line that ends with a backslash
.Po
.Dq \e
.Pc
is concatenated with the following one, and the newline character is
ignored.
If a backslashed newline happens before the start of a value, then the
whitespace at the beginning of the new line will be part of the value
(i.e. leading whitespace on a new line is not stripped).
.Pp
C escapes, including hexadecimal and octal sequences, are supported in
quoted values.
Unicode codepoint sequences are not supported.
It is possible to include a newline in a quoted value by using
.Ql \en ;
but including newlines in environment variables is not recommended.
.Pp
If
.Ar value
is empty,
.Ar key
is
.Sy still
added to the environment, with an empty value.
If you do not want
.Ar key
to be added to the environment at all, comment out the line.
.Nm
does not offer a way to
.Em remove
variables from the environment.
.Pp
The
.Nm
format is largely compatible with systemd's EnvironmentFile[1] format,
which allows for the reuse of such files outside of systemd.
.Pp
If
.Ar file
is
.Ql -
then
.Nm
reads and parses its standard input instead.
To read a file literally named
.Ql - ,
you can use
.Ql ./-
for instance.
.Pp
The variables that can be defined with
.Nm
are purposefully restricted.
If you need more expressive power for your variable names, or for your
values, you should use an envdir instead: see
.Xr s6-envdir 8 .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl i
Strict.
If
.Ar file
does not exist, exit 111 with an error message.
This is the default.
.It Fl I
Loose.
If
.Ar file
does not exist,
.Xr exec 3
into
.Ar prog
without modifying the environment.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It 1
Syntax error in
.Ar file .
.It 100
Wrong usage.
.It 111
System call failed.
.It 126
.Xr execve 2
on
.Ar prog
failed (unknown reason).
.It 127
.Xr execve 2
on
.Ar prog
failed
.Po
.Ar prog
could not be found.
.Pc
.El
.Pp
0 is not listed because on success,
.Nm
does not exit: it execs into
.Ar prog .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr emptyenv 1 ,
.Xr exec 1 ,
.Xr execline-cd 1 ,
.Xr execline-umask 1 ,
.Xr exit 1 ,
.Xr export 1 ,
.Xr fdblock 1 ,
.Xr fdclose 1 ,
.Xr fdmove 1 ,
.Xr fdreserve 1 ,
.Xr fdswap 1 ,
.Xr getcwd 1 ,
.Xr getpid 1 ,
.Xr heredoc 1 ,
.Xr piperw 1 ,
.Xr posix-cd 1 ,
.Xr posix-umask 1 ,
.Xr redirfd 1 ,
.Xr trap 1 ,
.Xr tryexec 1 ,
.Xr unexport 1 ,
.Xr wait 1 ,
.Xr withstdinas 1 ,
.Xr execve 2 ,
.Xr exec 3 ,
.Xr s6-envdir 8
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.exec.html#EnvironmentFile=
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/envfile.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
