.Dd February 14, 2021
.Dt FORX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm forx
.Nd run a loop
.Sh SYNOPSIS
In an
.Xr execlineb 1
script:
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl E | Fl e
.Op Fl p
.Op Fl o Ar okcodes | Fl x Ar breakcodes
.Ar variable
{
.Ar args...
}
.Ar loop...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads a block
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pc
and unquotes it.
That block contains a list of
.Ar args .
.Pp
For each argument
.Ar x
in
.Ar args... ,
.Nm
runs
.Ar loop
as a child process, with
.Sm off
.Ar variable
=
.Ar x
.Sm on
added to its environment.
.Pp
.Nm
then exits 0.
.Pp
You can start
.Ar loop
with
.Ql importas -u Ar variable Ar variable
if you want variable substitution.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl o Ar okcodes
.Ar okcodes
must be a comma-separated list of exit codes.
If
.Ar loop
exits with one of the codes in
.Ar okcodes ,
.Nm
will run the following instances of the loop, but if the exit code is
not listed in
.Ar okcodes ,
.Nm
will exit immediately with an approximation
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-exitcodes 7
.Pc
of the same exit code.
.It Fl x Ar breakcodes
Like the previous option, but with inverted meaning - the listed exit
codes are codes that will make
.Nm
break the loop and exit, and the unlisted exit codes will make it keep
looping.
.It Fl p
Run in parallel.
Do not wait for an instance of
.Ar loop...
to exit before spawning the next one.
.Nm
will still wait for all instances of
.Ar loop
to terminate before exiting 0.
If the
.Fl o
option has been given,
.Nm
will exit 0 if all of the exit codes are in the values listed in the
.Ar okcodes
list, else it will exit 1.
If the
.Fl x
option has been given,
.Nm
will exit 0 if none of the exit codes are in the values listed in the
.Ar breakcodes
list, else it will exit 1.
.It Fl e
No autoimport.
This is the default.
.It Fl E
Autoimport.
Instead of spawning
.Ar loop... ,
spawn
.Ql importas -ui Ar variable Ar variable Ar loop... .
This substitutes
.Ar variable
into the command line instead of putting it into the environment.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr forbacktickx 1 ,
.Xr forstdin 1 ,
.Xr loopwhilex 1 ,
.Xr execline-block 7 ,
.Xr execline-exitcodes 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/forx.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
