.Dd February 14, 2021
.Dt LOOPWHILEX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm loopwhilex
.Nd perform a conditional loop
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n
.Op Fl o Ar okcodes | Fl x Ar breakcodes
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
runs
.Ar prog...
as a child process and waits for it to complete.
.Pp
As long as
.Ar prog
exits zero,
.Nm
runs it again.
.Pp
.Nm
then exits with an approximation
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-exitcodes 7
.Pc
of the last
.Ar prog
invocation's exit code.
.Pp
.Ql loopwhilex Ar prog...
is equivalent to
.Ql loopwhilex Fl n Fl x No 0 Ar prog...
and
.Ql loopwhilex Fl o No 0 Ar prog...
.Pp
Be careful: execline
.Sy maintains no state ,
in particular it uses
.Sy no real variables ,
and environment will be of no use here since every instance of
.Ar prog...
runs as a separate child process.
To avoid being stuck in an infinite loop,
.Ar prog...
should modify some external state - for instance, the filesystem.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl o Ar okcodes
.Ar okcodes
must be a comma-separated list of exit codes.
.Nm
will keep looping as long as
.Ar prog
exits with one of the codes in
.Ar okcodes .
.It Fl x Ar breakcodes
Like the previous option, but with inverted meaning - the listed exit
codes are codes that will break the loop and exit, and the unlisted
exit codes will keep the loop running.
.It Fl n
Negate the test.
This option is now redundant, and may disappear soon.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr forbacktickx 1 ,
.Xr forstdin 1 ,
.Xr forx 1 ,
.Xr execline-exitcodes 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/loopwhilex.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
