.Dd February 14, 2021
.Dt MULTIDEFINE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm multidefine
.Nd split a value and defines several variables at once, then execute another program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
In an
.Xr execlineb 1
script:
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl 0
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl C | Fl c
.Op Fl N | Fl n
.Op Fl d Ar delim
.Ar value
{
.Ar variables...
}
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads a block
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pc
containing a list of variables.
That block must not be empty.
.Pp
.Nm
splits
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-transform 7
.Pc
.Ar value ,
and performs other operations depending on the given options.
.Pp
.Nm
performs parallel substitution
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-substitute 7
.Pc
on
.Ar prog... ,
using all of the
.Ar variables
in the block as keys.
The first word in the split
.Ar value
is assigned to the first
.Ar variable ,
the second word is assigned to the second
.Ar variable ,
and so on.
Every
.Ar variable
is substituted with exactly one word.
.Pp
If a
.Ar variable
is the empty word, then the word in the split
.Ar value
corresponding to its position is not substituted.
So you can use empty words to pad the list of variables and only
perform substition on the relevant fields.
.Pp
.Nm
then
.Xr exec 3 Ns
s into the modified
.Ar prog... .
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl 0
If there are more
.Ar variables
in the block than there are words in the split
.Ar value ,
the excess variables will be replaced with zero word.
Without this option, the excess variables are replaced with the empty
word.
.It Fl r
Behave similarly to the
.Dq read
shell command.
If there are more words in the split
.Ar value
than there are
.Ar variables
in the block, the last variable will be replaced with all the
remaining words (and will be split).
Without this option, the last variable is replaced with a single word,
and the excess words are lost.
.El
.Pp
Other options are used to control
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-transform 7
.Pc
the substitution mechanism.
Note that the value is always split.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr define 1 ,
.Xr elgetpositionals 1 ,
.Xr elglob 1 ,
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr importas 1 ,
.Xr multisubstitute 1 ,
.Xr exec 3 ,
.Xr execline-block 7 ,
.Xr execline-substitute 7 ,
.Xr execline-transform 7
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/multidefine.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
