.Dd February 14, 2021
.Dt RUNBLOCK 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm runblock
.Nd execute an
.Xr execline-block 7
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl P
.Op Fl n Ar argshift
.Op Fl r
.Ar n
.Ar cmd...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm Ap
s purpose is to help you write execline commands in the execline language.
It can only be used inside an execline script.
If the script has been given blocks as arguments,
.Nm
allows you to execute one of the blocks individually.
It also allows you to give those blocks as a set of arguments to
another command.
.Pp
.Nm
skips the first
.Ar argshift
positional parameters.
It does that to allow you to design commands that take simple
arguments
.Em and
blocks.
.Pp
Then
.Nm
looks for and parses blocks
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pc
in the positional parameters.
.Pp
If the
.Fl r
option is present:
.Nm
skips
.Ar n
blocks and execs into the remaining arguments.
.Pp
Else it skips
.Ar n Ns
-1 blocks and execs into the
.Ar n Ns
th one.
.Pp
If
.Ar cmd...
is not empty, then instead of directly executing the block or the remainder,
.Nm
.Em appends
the selected set of arguments to the
.Ar cmd...
command line.
.Pp
Normally
.Nm
pops
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-pushenv 7
.Pc
its environment frame before executing.
If the
.Fl P
option has been given, it
.Em does not
pop.
.Pp
Of course, if the block structure doesn't match,
.Nm
exits 100 with an error message.
.Ss Credits
The
.Nm runblock
idea, as well as the
.Xr ifelse 1
idea, comes from Paul Jarc[1].
.Sh EXAMPLES
Suppose that we want to implement the
.Xr ifelse 1
command as an execline script, using the
.Xr ifte 1
command.
.Nm
allows us to do it in a simple way:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
#!/command/execlineb
ifte { runblock 2 } { runblock -r 2 } runblock 1
.Ed
.Pp
That's it.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr background 1 ,
.Xr backtick 1 ,
.Xr foreground 1 ,
.Xr if 1 ,
.Xr ifelse 1 ,
.Xr ifte 1 ,
.Xr ifthenelse 1 ,
.Xr pipeline 1
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://code.dogmap.org/
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/runblock.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
