.Dd February 14, 2021
.Dt SHIFT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm shift
.Nd shift the positional parameters of an execline script
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n Ar argn
.Op Fl b Ar blockn
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
shifts
.Ar argn
positional parameters, then
.Ar blockn
blocks.
It then
.Xr exec 3 Ns
s
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
By default,
.Ar argn
and
.Ar blockn
are both zero; but if neither the
.Fl n
nor the
.Fl b
option is given, then
.Ar argn
is 1 and
.Ar blockn
is 0.
.Pp
.Ql shift
is a standard shell builtin.
Be careful if you want to use it outside of an execline script.
.Pp
The
.Fl b
option is only useful to implement execline commands in the execline
language.
You shouldn't normally have to use it.
.Ss Details
.Bl -bullet -width x
.It
.Nm
reads the number of
.Dq positional parameters
in the
.Ev \&#
environment variable.
Let
.Ar n
be that number.
.It
If the
.Ev \&#
environment variable is not set or does not contain a valid number, or
one of the
.Ev 0 ,
.Ev 1 ,
\&...,
.Ar n
environment variables is not set,
.Nm
exits 100 with an error message.
.It
.Nm
calculates a shift value
.Ar m ,
corresponding to
.Ar argn
arguments followed by enough arguments to make
.Ar blockn
blocks.
.It
It shifts the positional parameters
.Ar m
times: the value of the
.Sm off
.Ar m
+1
.Sm on
variable becomes the value of the
.Ev 1
variable,
.Sm off
.Ar m
+2
.Sm on
becomes
.Ev 2
and so on, and
.Ev \&#
is set to
.Sm off
.Ar n
-
.Ar m
.Sm on
(floored at zero).
.It
.Nm
then
.Xr exec 3 Ns
s into
.Ar prog... .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dollarat 1 ,
.Xr elgetopt 1 ,
.Xr exec 3
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/shift.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
