.Dd May 31, 2022
.Dt WAIT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wait
.Nd wait for a set of children, then execute a program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
In an
.Xr execlineb 1
script:
.Pp
.Nm
.Op Fl I | Fl i
.Op Fl a | Fl o
.Op Fl r | Fl t Ar timeout
{
.Op Ar pids...
}
.Ar prog...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
reads a list of
.Ar pids
in a (possibly empty) block
.Po
cf.\&
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pc ,
and unquotes it.
.Pp
.Nm
waits for every child whose pid is listed in
.Ar pids... .
If
.Ar pids...
is an empty list, it waits for every child process it has.
.Pp
.Nm
then
.Xr exec 3 Ns
s into
.Ar prog... .
.Pp
For POSIX compatibility[1],
.Nm
also works when it cannot find a block.
In that case, all the options are still supported and have the same
effect, but the rest of the command line is interpreted as
.Ar pids...
arguments and
.Nm
does not execute into a program; instead, it exits with a conforming
exit code.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width x
.It Fl r
Equivalent to
.Ql -t 0 .
Do not pause: only reap processes that are already dead when
.Nm
is invoked.
.It Fl t Ar timeout
Wait for a maximum of
.Ar timeout
milliseconds.
If there still are living processes among
.Ar pids...
(or among
.Nm Ap
s children if
.Ar pids...
is an empty list), after
.Ar timeout
milliseconds, they will not be reaped.
.It Fl I
Loose.
If
.Nm
times out while waiting for children to die, it will still
.Xr exec 3
into
.Ar prog... .
This is the default.
.It Fl i
Strict.
If
.Nm
times out, it will print an error message and exit 99.
.It Fl o
Wait for
.Em one
of the listed
.Ar pids
-
.Xr exec 3
into
.Ar prog
as soon as one of the listed children dies.
.Po
If no pid is listed, wait for one child to die.
.Pc
The
.Ev !\&
environment variable will be set to the pid that died, and the
.Ev ?\&
environment variable will contain an approximation of its exit code -
refer to
.Xr execline-exitcodes 7 .
If no listed child has died before
.Nm
has to
.Xr exec 3
.Po
either because it timed out or it has no suitable children left
.Pc ,
the
.Ev ?\&
and
.Ev !\&
environment variables are unset.
.It Fl a
Wait for
.Em all
of the listed
.Ar pids .
Do not touch the
.Ev !\&
or
.Ev ?\&
variables.
This is the default.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr emptyenv 1 ,
.Xr envfile 1 ,
.Xr exec 1 ,
.Xr execline-cd 1 ,
.Xr execline-umask 1 ,
.Xr execlineb 1 ,
.Xr exit 1 ,
.Xr export 1 ,
.Xr fdblock 1 ,
.Xr fdclose 1 ,
.Xr fdmove 1 ,
.Xr fdreserve 1 ,
.Xr fdswap 1 ,
.Xr getcwd 1 ,
.Xr getpid 1 ,
.Xr heredoc 1 ,
.Xr piperw 1 ,
.Xr posix-cd 1 ,
.Xr posix-umask 1 ,
.Xr redirfd 1 ,
.Xr trap 1 ,
.Xr tryexec 1 ,
.Xr unexport 1 ,
.Xr withstdinas 1 ,
.Xr exec 3 ,
.Xr execline-block 7
.Pp
[1]
.Lk https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/wait.html
.Pp
This man page is ported from the authoritative documentation at:
.Lk https://skarnet.org/software/execline/wait.html
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Laurent Bercot
.An Alexis Ao Mt flexibeast@gmail.com Ac (man page port)
